In 2003 the prince of Liechtenstein proposed an amendment to the country's constitution, which provided him with expanded authorities, including the right to dissolve the Parliament, to nominate the Prime Minister and to impose a veto on all legal acts. Still, the Principality is considered to be the constitutional monarchy, where country's unicameral, 25-member Landtag is dominated by two pro-government parties: right-wing Fortschrittliche Bürgerpartei (Progressive Citizen's Party), which holds to 9 seats, and centrist Vaterländische Union (The Patriotic Union) with 8 deputies.

Liechtenstein has a well diversified economy, where, standing alongside investment banks, insurance and finance companies, there are also agriculture, electronics, textiles, power tools and pharmaceuticals production industries. However, Liechtenstein, with its tiny population and high costs of living, doesn't have a large internal market, which may serve as the launching pad for local technological startups. At the same time, high level of country's integration into EU marketplace and the developed financial and banking industries may help Liechtensteiner tech founders to create an e-business aimed at the European Union consumers in FinTech sector.

The Financial Market Authority (Finanzmarktaufsicht), which is the main financial regulator of the Principality, had created a precedent by approving ICO of the non-profit CBN Foundation in autumn 2017. Additionally, the Swiss franc (CHF) has been the currency of Liechtenstein since 1920. Therefor, the Swiss National Bank (SNB), which has already demonstrated its progressive stance on digital currencies, is de-facto responsible for the monetary policy of Liechtenstein. Those factors let us speculate about the possibility to create a safe-heaven for cryptocurrencies in this small European country.

Business Notes for Startups Founders:

political climate: indifferent;
economic climate: marginally friendly;
regions to focus: EU;
industries to focus: FinTech (digital currencies);
major limitations: slowing economy (GDP growth rate has fallen from 10% to under 0% in 2017), tiny population of less than 40,000 inhabitants, high costs of running business;
stimulus: very high-income consumers (per-capita exceeds $140000), service sector commits more than 50% to GDP, developed financial and bank industries, low taxes (corporate tax rate at 12.5%), fixed Internet penetration rate exceeds 95%;
opportunities: to build an e-business aimed at the European Union markets in FinTech sector;
Cryptocurrencies and ICOs (outlook): legal (positive).
The author: Svyatoslav (Svet) Sedov

Angel investor and founder of The First International Incubator for Silicon Valley Companies (FirstInternational.In) in the Bay Area, CA, USA.

Twitter: https://twitter.com/SvjatoslavSedof
