Trinidad and Tobago gained its independence from the United Kingdom on 31 August 1962. The bicameral Parliament includes 41-members House of Representatives and 31-members Senate. Both are controlled by two major political parties - the right-wing People's National Movement (PNM) and left-wing United National Congress (UNC). After September 2015 elections PNM holds on to the majority of seats in both chambers (23 and 16 seats).

Since 1950th Trinidad government had been heavily relying on oil and gas exports to support country's economy. Today petroleum sector contributes more than 40% to islands' GDP and 80% to its export but employs only 5% of the population. Finance and tourism industries have been lately expanding as the government is trying to diversify the economy.

In 1990th, according to some reports, Trinidad and Tobago was converted into the one of major transportation hubs for cocaine smuggling into the United States. Today from 20% to 30% of Trinidad's GDP are, reportedly, derived from drugs trafficking related activities.

Technological industries are absent from the structure of Tobago's oil-dependent economy and local startup ecosystem is in its infancy. Additionally, geographical isolation, small population, administrative and legal barriers, shortage of qualified personnel and absence of VC and seed capital have further undermined the growth potentials of local tech startups. On the positive side, expanding finance and tourism sectors may provide local tech entrepreneurs with some local market opportunities.

In 2014 The Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago issued the warning on the use of cryptocurrencies, which, basically, stated that the concept of virtual currency has been already addressed under the framework established for electronic money by the Financial Institutions Act of 2008 of Trinidad and Tobago. This Act treats the issuance of virtual currency as the issuance of stored value or receipts of funds, which can be accepted as payment by persons other than the issuer.

This activity is defined within the context of business of a financial nature and requires the approval of the Central Bank. Bank also warned that potential users must be aware of the risks involved in virtual currencies investing and added that regulators seek to establish appropriate frameworks to manage this market. Still, trading cryptocurrencies and organizing ICOs are legal in the country.

Business Notes for Startups Founders:

political climate: indifferent;
economic climate: not friendly;
regions to focus: locally;
industries to focus: FinTech, e-services (tourism);
major limitations: shrinking economy (GDP growth rate has stayed in the negative zone for two year reaching -12%), over-dependence on natural gas export (40% of GDP), relatively small population of about 1.4 million inhabitants, poor infrastructure, drug related crimes, high administrative barriers;
stimulus: growing tourism and finance sectors, fixed Internet penetration rate about 70%;
opportunities: to build an e-business aimed at the users of the mobile Internet in the growing tourist and FinTech sectors;
Cryptocurrencies and ICOs (outlook): legal (moderately negative).
The author: Svyatoslav (Svet) Sedov

Angel investor and founder of The First International Incubator for Silicon Valley Companies (FirstInternational.In) in the Bay Area, CA, USA.

Twitter: https://twitter.com/SvjatoslavSedof
